feat: create eslint-community GitHub organization (#91)
eslint/rfcs: designs/2022-community-eslint-org/README.md

- Repo: No ESLint repos, only the ones mentioned below (owned by private
  persons)
- Start Date: 2022-05-31
- RFC PR:
- Authors: [@aladdin-add](https://github.com/aladdin-add),
  [@MichaelDeBoey](https://github.com/MichaelDeBoey),
  [@ota-meshi](https://github.com/ota-meshi) &
  [@voxpelli](https://github.com/voxpelli)

> # `@eslint-community` GitHub organisation

Reviewer: The official notation seems to be `organization`.

```suggestion
# `@eslint-community` GitHub organization
```

## Summary

<!-- One-paragraph explanation of the feature. -->

Facilitate a GitHub organisation
([@eslint-community](https://github.com/eslint-community)) where community
members could maintain widely used ESLint related packages that would otherwise

> get abandoned.

Reviewer 2: My hope is to have a centralized home for important/widely used eslint-related packages, not just for unmaintained ones. We can outline:
1. Who's the org maintainers? the abilities and responsibilities?
2. Acceptance criteria?
3. Process for Adding new projects? what info should be provided (repo, package name, maintainer, reason)? how/who to evaluate?
4. the package maintainer's abilities and responsibilities?
5. security & funding....

Reviewer 2: > it risks signaling that modules there are better/preferred over plugins outside of it.

But we can document the fact: it's not an official org - just like its name - it's community maintained.

> It also risks adding lots of unrelated maintainers into a shared group with little collective ownership, making it hard to push for an active and progressive maintenance.

The package maintainers have just control of their repo, and no other repos. I think the org admin/eslint team won't take in the regular maintenance. does it make sense to you?

Reviewer 3: > The package maintainers have just control of their repo, and no other repos. I think the org admin/eslint team won't take in the regular maintenance. does it make sense to you?

Maintaining all of these individually rather than collectively with a single streamlined process, that seems unnecessary.

I rather pull them into a place where they can be maintained collectively by a single group, where the processes for each can be shared by the others, thus lowering the burden + lowering the reliance on any individual member of that group.

- [@mysticatea/eslint-plugin](https://github.com/mysticatea/eslint-plugin)
- [eslint-plugin-eslint-comments](https://github.com/mysticatea/eslint-plugin-eslint-comments)
- [eslint-plugin-es](https://github.com/mysticatea/eslint-plugin-es)
- [eslint-plugin-node](https://github.com/mysticatea/eslint-plugin-node)
- [eslint-utils](https://github.com/mysticatea/eslint-utils)
- [eslint-plugin-promise](https://github.com/xjamundx/eslint-plugin-promise)

Author: @aladdin-add We _could_ streamline things, but that it's not a goal on its own.

The main goal still remains to maintain abandoned ESLint related packages that are widely depended upon imo.

> Facilitate a GitHub organisation
> ([@eslint-community](https://github.com/eslint-community)) where community
> members could maintain widely used ESLint related packages that would otherwise
> get abandoned.

Reviewer 3: My preferred wording:

```suggestion
Facilitate a GitHub organization
(eg. [@eslint-community](https://github.com/eslint-community)) where community
members can help ensure widely used ESLint related packages stay up to date with newer ESLint releases and doesn't hold the wider community back.
```

## Motivation

<!-- Why are we doing this? What use cases does it support? What is the expected
outcome? -->

> There a some widely used ESLint related packages that aren't actively maintained
> anymore and we'd like to transfer them to a community owned GitHub organization
> (`@eslint-community`), so we can give them back to the community.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are some widely depended upon ESLint related packages that aren't kept up to date with eg. new ESLint releases. The community would like a place to collectively step in and ensure that these doesn't hold the wider community back.
```

## Detailed Design

<!--
   This is the bulk of the RFC.

   Explain the design with enough detail that someone familiar with ESLint
   can implement it by reading this document. Please get into specifics
   of your approach, corner cases, and examples of how the change will be
   used. Be sure to define any new terms in this section.
-->

### How do you envision `@eslint-community`?

> Just like the [@jest-community](https://github.com/jest-community) org, the

Reviewer 3: If we want to reference the `@jest-community`, then we should reference some kind of explanation of theirs on what their goal and intention is.

Author: I think it would be a good idea for  @G-Rath & @SimenB to give us some more insights into what the exact goal & intention of @jest-community is.

Reviewer 3: > I think it would be a good idea for @G-Rath & @SimenB to give us some more insights into what the exact goal & intention of @jest-community is.

Did you ping them outside of this comment? Because I would imagine their GitHub inboxes to be a nightmare

Author: I'll send them a message on Discord/Twitter to ask if they want to give us the mentioned insights.

Reviewer 4: I think @jeysal, @mattphillips, and @SimenB are the ones to ask here - while I'm a core maintainer of `eslint-plugin-jest`, I've not been involved in (or seen tbh) the @jest-community side of things.

I think that the goal of is it similar to what we're discussing here (or part of at least): a loose but centralized home for stuff `jest` core thinks is neat and worth having but doesn't belong in the core itself, and so a way to help ensure that these projects are not dependent on a one person's GitHub account in case they move on.

Reviewer 5: Agreed.

> `@eslint-community` org would be a collection of important/widely used ESLint

Reviewer 3: I would prefer `widely depended` upon rather than `important/widely`.

Some modules can be widely used without actually holding the wider community back. The trickier part are plugins like `eslint-plugin-node` and similar, that used to be core ESLint functionality that many people used but now lives on in abandoned modules and eg. held users of them back from upgrading to ESLint 8. Such modules are hard to replace.

plugins/packages that aren't maintained anymore and are given back to the
community.

> Community repos for ESLint related projects

The projects could be released under the `@eslint-community` scope in a later

> stage.

Reviewer 3: Are you referring to npm scope? I think the npm scope is even more important than the GitHub org, as getting access to publish on npm is the one critical part in adding new maintainers.

On that note: I would propose enforcing a fully automated release flow through something like [`google-github-actions/release-please-action`](https://github.com/google-github-actions/release-please-action) as that makes it so that individual maintainers does not need to be added to npm, instead their access to merge PR:s is enough.

Reviewer 2: another important thing: the github/npm members must enable 2FA.

Author: > Are you referring to npm scope? I think the npm scope is even more important than the GitHub org, as getting access to publish on npm is the one critical part in adding new maintainers.

I was indeed referring to the `@eslint-community` npm scope, which I currently created already to make sure we don't loose it.

CC/ @nzakas I'm happy to transfer ownership to the ESLint team if that's preferred.

> I would propose enforcing a fully automated release flow through something like [`google-github-actions/release-please-action`](https://github.com/google-github-actions/release-please-action) as that makes it so that individual maintainers does not need to be added to npm, instead their access to merge PR:s is enough.

@kentcdodds set  up something similar for @remark-embedder & @testing-library orgs, where a bot account is actually publishing new versions & people only need write access on the repo. CI + the bot would do the rest.

> the github/npm members must enable 2FA

I think that would indeed be a good idea 👍

Reviewer 3: If the `@eslint-community` org would never fork projects but only accept projects that are moved into it by their original maintainers, then the npm scope is much less important. So this reconnects to the https://github.com/eslint/rfcs/pull/91#discussion_r885800643 discussion.

Author: I think the goal should be to transfer the original repository to the new org.

If that's not possible because we can't get in touch with the owner or due to other reasons, I think a fork would unblock the community.

Although I think that if we would have a fork and we could transfer the original repo to the org at a later point in time, we should do so & see that we bring the original repo up to date with the fork first before moving forward.

The benefit of having the org in place would be that we could create a structure

> to streamline the packages more, i.e. tools used, supported Node/ESLint

Reviewer 3: Should elaborate on `streamline` here.

Author: I mentioned things like using same tools, which Node/ESLint versions are supported, ...

What would you like to see more explained?

Reviewer 3: @MichaelDeBoey I think eg. @aladdin-add is of a different perception on this. See: https://github.com/eslint/rfcs/pull/91#discussion_r885453500

Streamlining like this requires some level of collective maintainership at the org level rather than having each module maintained in isolation. Eg. @aladdin-add seems to be under the perception/belief that no such collective ownership will/should happen here.

Author: I'll make it more clear that we _could_ streamline things, but that it's not a goal on its own.

The main goal still remains to maintain abandoned ESLint related packages that are widely depended upon imo.

versions, ...

### Which projects should be involved?

I think all of [@aladdin-add](https://github.com/aladdin-add),
[@ota-meshi](https://github.com/ota-meshi) &
[@voxpelli](https://github.com/voxpelli) & myself would be in for helping to
maintain at least the following packages:
[`@mysticatea/eslint-plugin`](https://github.com/mysticatea/eslint-plugin),
[`eslint-plugin-eslint-comments`](https://github.com/mysticatea/eslint-plugin-eslint-comments),
[`eslint-plugin-es`](https://github.com/mysticatea/eslint-plugin-es),
[`eslint-plugin-node`](https://github.com/mysticatea/eslint-plugin-node),

> [`eslint-utils`](https://github.com/mysticatea/eslint-utils) (all from

Reviewer 6: If we need to have `eslint-utils` in this community, we probably need to add `regexpp` to this community as well.
`regexpp` and `eslint-utils` are also used in the eslint core.
https://github.com/mysticatea/regexpp
https://github.com/mysticatea/eslint-utils

Reviewer 6: Or should the packages used in the eslint core be separate from the organization proposed in this RFC?

Reviewer 3: @ota-meshi Maybe not needed to decide now. Would make sense for ESLint itself to maybe take them on.

Author: Since `regexpp` is used in the main repo, I think it should (at least) be in the new org as well.
Since it's extracted into a personal account, I don't think the core team wants to maintain the package themselves.

I personally think that the acceptance criteria for a plugin to go under the
`@eslint-community` org would be:

- Is it a package that is ESLint-related?  
  Mostly this will be ESLint configs/plugins, but I can see unmaintained
  dependencies of such packages, closely related packages or packages split from
  the main ESLint repo (like
  [`eslint-formatter-codeframe`](https://github.com/fregante/eslint-formatter-codeframe)
  or
  [`eslint-formatter-table`](https://github.com/fregante/eslint-formatter-table),
  which are currently maintained by [@fregante](https://github.com/fregante)).

- Is it widely used throughout the community?  
  Don't have an exact number in mind, but all mentioned packages have at least
  3M downloads/week.  
  Only exceptions are `eslint-plugin-eslint-comments` (1M downloads/week) &
  `@mysticatea/eslint-plugin` (1.3K downloads/week), which is used as a
  devDependency for all other mentioned packages by `@mysticatea`.

- It didn't receive an update in the last 12(?) months  
  I think we can make an exception for packages that did get a PR merged which
  was created by a member of the new org's "core" team (mostly for updating

>   compatibility with newer versions of ESLint).

Reviewer 3: Not sure we need to have a hard number here. In some cases a maintainer explicitly steps down and would want to donate their project, which would be preferable (the case with `eslint-plugin-promise`)

Author: The only update that package got was mine, which was an ESLint 8 compatibility PR.
So I think that would fall under the quoted description?

### What permissions should maintainers have?

I think it would be best to have some sort of a "core" team (of at least 3(?)
people) that's making the decisions in terms of acceptance to the repo, which
would all be admin of the org.

We can make a team (with sub-teams if we want) for each package, where we give
admin rights on the repo for that specific package.

The core team would help maintain all repos, whereas people in specific teams
would only help maintain these repositories.

**Bonus:** I think having our own place in the Discord server where we can
discuss some things would be a good idea as well.  
This way the "core" team has an open place to discuss some common things like
extracting common functionality into a separate package, minimum Node & ESLint
target, how to handle disputes between maintainers, ...  
Having a channel for each separate package would maybe be a good idea as well,
so the community has a change to ask questions to the maintainers as well.

### What should be the role of the ESLint team?

I think most important role would be to facilitate at least the contact with
`@mysticatea`, so we can transfer his packages over to the `@eslint-community`

> org & gain `npm` publish rights for the packages.

Reviewer 3: I mean the git tree of [weiran-zsd/eslint-plugin-node](https://github.com/weiran-zsd/eslint-plugin-node), not the npm package

> org & gain `npm` publish rights for the packages.

Author: I would prefer to transfer the original repo to the new org and create new PRs to have all fixes from the fork upstream as well.

But that's only possible if we can get in touch with @mysticatea & transfer over the repo.

> org & gain `npm` publish rights for the packages.

Reviewer 3: Right.

In my priorities my number one is to "fix" https://github.com/weiran-zsd/eslint-plugin-node/issues/8 The merge with upstream is of less importance to me.

Hence this highlights that we/me/some of us are possibly conflating two projects here:

1. A place to collectively maintain forks like https://github.com/weiran-zsd/eslint-plugin-node
2. A neutral place to move unmaintained modules to

Right here and now we don't know when 2 can happen for anything but `eslint-plugin-promise`, we can only speculate, whereas 1. we can move ahead with right away. Moving ahead with 1. is outside the scope of this RFC though, but it's a useful distinction to keep in mind.

That would also mean that the `@eslint-community` very rarely would publish modules under the `@eslint-community` as it would never fork projects.

> org & gain `npm` publish rights for the packages.

Reviewer 7: Yes, I’m saying the ideal should be the original repo, and the fork’s repo should end up being deleted after its changes are pushed to the original.

> org & gain `npm` publish rights for the packages.

Reviewer 7: I agree with you - I’m saying that the ideal is to obviate the fork. Only if the original is truly impossible to recover should the existing fork be treated as canonical.

> org & gain `npm` publish rights for the packages.

Reviewer 3: I think we should question the value in moving rather than forking.

Projects like Babel and Fastify have both moved to prefixes for their non-forked modules. In a way it would make sense for an `@eslint-community` project to follow that and publish all modules under a prefix, eg: `@eslint-community/eslint-plugin-node`

If one anyway will do such a rename, then the only upsides of moving rather than forking is:

1. The ability to oneself deprecate the old name on npm rather than the original maintainer potentially doing so
2. An automated redirect from the old GitHub repo to the new (one which could be substituted somewhat by a link in the readme of that project instead)

While the downside with aiming for a move is:

1. Reliance on outside parties
2. Unclear when it will happen or if it at all will happen

I can see the elegance in moving rather than forking, but I think elegance carries little value here. (I'm talking about an actual fork rather than a GitHub fork)

Next to that, I can see the ESLint team talk to the "core" team of the new org
regarding creating new community maintained packages that are split out from the
main ESLint repo. Examples of these kind of repos are:

- `eslint-plugin-node`  
  This plugin was recommended because of the deprecation of some rules in v7  
  <https://eslint.org/docs/user-guide/migrating-to-7.0.0#deprecate-node-rules>
- `eslint-formatter-codeframe` & `eslint-formatter-table`  
  These were both in the main ESLint repo but were removed in v8 and are
  currently maintained by [@fregante](https://github.com/fregante)  
  <https://eslint.org/docs/8.0.0/user-guide/migrating-to-8.0.0#-removed-codeframe-and-table-formatters>
- `eslint-plugin-eslint-plugin`  
  This plugin is (together with `eslint-plugin-node`) a recommended plugin for
  linting custom plugins.  
  <https://eslint.org/docs/developer-guide/working-with-plugins#linting>

## Documentation

<!--
    How will this RFC be documented? Does it need a formal announcement
    on the ESLint blog to explain the motivation?
-->

> I don't think this RFC needs a formal announcement on the ESLint blog.

Reviewer 3: I think it would be good to have one.

## Drawbacks

<!--
    Why should we *not* do this? Consider why adding this into ESLint
    might not benefit the project or the community. Attempt to think
    about any opposing viewpoints that reviewers might bring up.

    Any change has potential downsides, including increased maintenance
    burden, incompatibility with other tools, breaking existing user
    experience, etc. Try to identify as many potential problems with
    implementing this RFC as possible.
-->

I can't think of a reason why we would not want this.  
Once we have access to the `@eslint-community` org & have the repos transfered,

> the "core" team can work out the rest of the process themselves.

Reviewer 3: The drawback is that this may puncture the wider community and give an impression of the modules being blessed / recommended by the core team and thus making other initiatives harder.

It could also put pressure on modules from other ESLint related organizations / maintainers to transfer their projects here as this is the "correct" place for popular packages.

Overall that can create quite a large organization where lots of different minds are forced together when then actually would thrive better when being organized in a more pluralistic landscape of multiple organizations.

Some actual considerations:

- How does this relate to stuff in eg. https://github.com/standard/ – would there be an expectency from the wider community or the eslint-community project itself to transfer some stuff from there?
- How about projects like https://github.com/sindresorhus/eslint-plugin-unicorn – will it be considered a problem that such a plugin is under @sindresorhus ownership rather than the eslint-community?
- How about something like [`eslint-config-airbnb-base`](https://www.npmjs.com/package/eslint-config-airbnb-base)? Could a ruleset like that be eligible for this community if abandoned at some point? Would there be a push by people to transfer such a module here? Will that make it look like an officially endorsed configuration? How would that affect projects like StandardJS?

Reviewer 2: good question! I don't think we want to accept share configs. If a shared config is no longer maintained, the users can:
* maintain a fork
* switch to another

    This section should also include prior art, such as whether similar
    projects have already implemented a similar feature.
-->

Creating a fork of the above mentioned packages. This could however create
ceveral forks (which would cause fragmentation in the community), but also has
the burden of needing to update all existing dependants.

## Open Questions

<!--
    This section is optional, but is suggested for a first draft.

    What parts of this proposal are you unclear about? What do you
    need to know before you can finalize this RFC?

    List the questions that you'd like reviewers to focus on. When
    you've received the answers and updated the design to reflect them,
    you can remove this section.
-->

- What exact acceptance criteria do we want to use?
- What's the main place of communication for the "core" team?

## Help Needed

<!--
    This section is optional.

    Are you able to implement this RFC on your own? If not, what kind
    of help would you need from the team?
-->

We would need to get access to the `@eslint-community` & be brought in contact
with `@mysticatea` to transfer his repos to the new org & get `npm` publish

> rights.

Author: As said before: I currently own the `@eslint-community` npm org, but I'm happy to transfer it over to the ESLint team if preferred.

Also: I want to mention `@mysticatea` somewhere so that it's clear we can't do anything with the original repos otherwise, as contacting him ourselves didn't work obviously.

> rights.

Reviewer 3: > Also: I want to mention `@mysticatea` somewhere so that it's clear we can't do anything with the original repos otherwise, as contacting him ourselves didn't work obviously.

@ota-meshi actually mentioned that he did get some contact: https://github.com/eslint/rfcs/pull/91#issuecomment-1141987023

Also: The  `eslint-plugin-promise` can be moved anyway, so maybe it can be the first repo

## Frequently Asked Questions

<!--
    This section is optional but suggested.

    Try to anticipate points of clarification that might be needed by
    the people reviewing this RFC. Include those questions and answers
    in this section.
-->

> ## Related Discussions
> 
> <!--
>     This section is optional but suggested.
> 
>     If there is an issue, pull request, or other URL that provides useful
>     context for this proposal, please include those links here.
> -->

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Related Discussions

<!--
    This section is optional but suggested.

    If there is an issue, pull request, or other URL that provides useful
    context for this proposal, please include those links here.
-->
- https://github.com/eslint/eslint/discussions/15929
- https://github.com/weiran-zsd/eslint-plugin-node/issues/8
- https://github.com/standard/eslint-config-standard/issues/192#issuecomment-1000279972
- https://github.com/mysticatea/eslint-plugin/pull/29#issuecomment-1139495904
- https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/15383
```

date with newer ESLint releases and doesn't hold the wider community back.

## Motivation

<!-- Why are we doing this? What use cases does it support? What is the expected
outcome? -->

There are some widely depended upon ESLint related packages that aren't kept up
to date with eg. new ESLint releases. The community would like a place to
collectively step in and ensure that these doesn't hold the wider community
back.

## Detailed Design

<!--
   This is the bulk of the RFC.

   Explain the design with enough detail that someone familiar with ESLint
   can implement it by reading this document. Please get into specifics
   of your approach, corner cases, and examples of how the change will be
   used. Be sure to define any new terms in this section.
-->

### How do you envision `@eslint-community`?

Just like the [@jest-community](https://github.com/jest-community) org, the
`@eslint-community` org would be a centralized home for ESLint related packages
that don't belong in the main org or that are widely depended upon, aren't
maintained anymore and are given back to the community.

> Community repos for ESLint related projects

> The benefit of having the org in place would be that the community isn't

Reviewer 8: Who is “we” here?

Author: I was referring to "the people maintaining the packages in the new org" with "we"

dependent on one person's GitHub/npm account.  
The added benefit is that we _could_ create a structure to streamline the

> packages more. We _could_ for instance decide things like using the same tools,

Reviewer 2: it sounds good, but it seems awfully hard to have the same tools to meet all the projects - they were created for different goals, maintained by different people, having different code structure....

I'd suggest a loose mode - the maintainers are free to use the tools - based how it was working before.

supporting the same Node/ESLint versions, if we want to release all "rescued"
packages under the `@eslint-community` npm scope or not, ...

As a reference, `@jest-community` has the following goal & intention:

> The goal of `@jest-community` is to have a loose but centralized home for
> stuff `jest` core thinks is neat and worth having but doesn't belong in the
> core itself. The org is a way to help ensure that these projects are not
> dependent on one person's GitHub account in case they move on.

### Which projects should be involved?

I think all of [@aladdin-add](https://github.com/aladdin-add),
[@ota-meshi](https://github.com/ota-meshi),
[@voxpelli](https://github.com/voxpelli) & myself would be in for helping to
maintain at least the following packages:

> [`@mysticatea/eslint-plugin`](https://github.com/mysticatea/eslint-plugin),

Reviewer 2: I'm not familiar with `@mysticatea/eslint-plugin`, something more like the author's personal preference? I'd prefer only to accept "important" projects - do not accept the ones just because it has a high downloads.

Reviewer 7: How do you measure importance if not with downloads?

Reviewer 3: <img width="971" alt="Skärmavbild 2022-06-02 kl  11 08 19" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/34457/171596464-0c12f54a-2a10-41d4-b651-cf0243652c7b.png">

That it has more than one public dependent module? Else its not critical to the ecosystem?

Here's `eslint-plugin-node` as a comparison, it has 2639 dependents:

<img width="936" alt="Skärmavbild 2022-06-02 kl  11 09 32" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/34457/171596713-581bca97-b4ec-471d-bce9-440173a0f11e.png">

Reviewer 6: `@mysticatea/eslint-plugin` depends as devDeps for most packages created by `@mysticatea` (but not compatible with ESLint v8). If we can take over the `@mysticatea` packages, we must first replace them with different eslint-plugin and eslint-config. If we clear that, I don't think we need to continue using `@mysticatea/eslint-plugin`.

Reviewer 6: However, if we expect `@mysticatea` to come back to OSS and maintain the community packages together, it may make sense to keep the original eslint configuration.

Author: All of the other mentioned packages by @mysticatea are indeed dependent on `@mysticatea/eslint-plugin` in their `devDependencies`.
Since `@mysticatea/eslint-plugin` is not ESLInt 8 compatible (yet), a lot of tests of the other plugins are failing.

We could indeed remove the package from `devDependencies`, but I think we can keep maintaining the package as well.

Reviewer 3: And we can probably leave any decision on that out of this RFC and focus on the guidelines to make such decisions instead.

Author: All of the other mentioned packages by @mysticatea are indeed dependent on `@mysticatea/eslint-plugin` in their `devDependencies`.
Since `@mysticatea/eslint-plugin` is not ESLInt 8 compatible (yet), a lot of tests of the other plugins are failing.

We could indeed remove the package from `devDependencies`, but I think we can keep maintaining the package as well.

  [`regexpp`](https://github.com/mysticatea/regexpp)) to be in the
  `@eslint-community` org as well.

- Is it widely depended upon throughout the community?  
  Don't have an exact number in mind, but all mentioned packages have at least
  3M downloads/week.  
  Only exceptions are `eslint-plugin-eslint-comments` (1M downloads/week) &
  `@mysticatea/eslint-plugin` (1.3K downloads/week), which is used as a
  devDependency for all other mentioned packages by `@mysticatea`.

- It didn't receive an update in the last 12(?) months  
  I think we can make an exception for packages that did get a PR merged which
  was created by a member of the new org's "core" team (mostly for updating
  compatibility with newer versions of ESLint).

  We can also make an exception for packages that meet the other criteria, but
  where the owner want to transfer ownership to the new org.  
  I can for instance imagine that
  [@not-an-aardvark](https://github.com/not-an-aardvark) would want to transfer
  ownership of
  [`eslint-plugin-eslint-plugin`](https://github.com/not-an-aardvark/eslint-plugin-eslint-plugin)
  to the new org as well, as it's a recommended plugin for linting custom

>   plugins.  

Reviewer 2: 👍 I had chatted this with not-an-aardvark a while ago, we agreed to transfer the repo to a better home.

  <https://eslint.org/docs/developer-guide/working-with-plugins#linting>  
  I can also imagine that people like [@gajus](https://github.com/gajus) at some
  point wanting to transfer ownership of
  [`eslint-plugin-flowtype`](https://github.com/gajus/eslint-plugin-flowtype) or
  [`eslint-plugin-jsdoc`](https://github.com/gajus/eslint-plugin-jsdoc) if they
  would feel it would be better maintained by the community instead of putting
  all workload on their shoulders.

If a package is meeting these criteria, but we can't get into contact with the
owner of the repo to transfer ownership over to the new org, we could
temporarily fork the repo & publish the package as
`@eslint-community-fork/<package name>` or so.

### What permissions should maintainers have?

> I think it would be best to have some sort of a "core" team (of at least 3(?)

Reviewer 8: You mean in addition to the ESLint TSC or separate? How would this team be determined?

Reviewer 3: I would say in addition to

Author: Indeed in addition to ESLint TSC.

Since the people mentioned in this RFC want to make this happen, I think we would be the first "core" team & we can see if we want to include more people over time or not.

  [@import-js](https://github.com/import-js) (which maintains
  [`eslint-plugin-import`](https://github.com/import-js/eslint-plugin-import)),
  [@jsx-eslint](https://github.com/jsx-eslint) (which maintains
  [`eslint-plugin-jsx-a11y`](https://github.com/jsx-eslint/eslint-plugin-jsx-a11y),
  [`eslint-plugin-react`](https://github.com/jsx-eslint/eslint-plugin-react) &
  [`jsx-ast-utils`](https://github.com/jsx-eslint/jsx-ast-utils)) &
  [@standard](https://github.com/standard) (which maintains a couple of
  [`standard`](https://github.com/standard/standard) related ESLint configs)

## Open Questions

<!--
    This section is optional, but is suggested for a first draft.

    What parts of this proposal are you unclear about? What do you
    need to know before you can finalize this RFC?

    List the questions that you'd like reviewers to focus on. When
    you've received the answers and updated the design to reflect them,
    you can remove this section.
-->

- What exact acceptance criteria do we want to use?
- What's the main place of communication for the "core" team?
- Will there be a single team collectively maintaining all modules within the

>   project? Or will each module possibly have their own maintainers?

Reviewer 2: > Or will each module possibly have their own maintainers?

👍 Having too many people with access is a security risk. A maintainer can invite a few collaborators(if want).

Reviewer 3: > Having too many people with access is a security risk. a package maintainer can invite a few collaborators(if wanted).

What happens if that package maintainer disappears? When should the package maintainer be considered to have disappeared? After 3 months of inactivity? 6 months?

What would be considered "inactive"? Not answering issues / PR:s? Not keeping up to date with ESLint major releases? Not doing security releases?

When does the core team then step in? How do they then step in? By adding new co-maintainers? By merging / releasing stuff themselves? By replacing the package maintainer with a new one?

With individual maintainers for each module the organization doesn't give any redundancy in maintenance, it just ensures that a new maintainer can be put into place once the project is deemed abandoned. Hence its still likely that one ends up in the same situation as now. Only thing then fixed is that there's an easy process for putting a new maintainer in place. The wider ecosystem will still have been held back for X amount of time then though.

Reviewer 9: > What happens if that package maintainer disappears? When should the package maintainer be considered to have disappeared? After 3 months of inactivity? 6 months?
> 
> What would be considered "inactive"?

I think that to disappear would be to become unresponsive via a private, personal channel.

Personally I think that a package maintainer should be contactable by "the committee" outside of GH (I.e. Email), and if they don't respond in some reasonable time frame (eg for NPM I think you've got 14 days to respond to a transfer request email) they're considered non-responsive, and "the committee" steps in to cleanup and appoint a new maintainer.

The beauty of some shared org is that the release process is centralised, so no need to  talk to NPM about an ownership transfer and no need to fork and republish under a new name. Just appoint new maintainers on GH and they can work to restore continuity of service - a process which would be invisible to users (I.e. Users might see a pause in updates but not have to make changes - the updates would just resume).

- What maintenance principles will be enforced?  
  Will each module have their own standards, release flows, dependency update

>   checks etc or will it be streamlined across all modules?

Reviewer 2: it seems awfully hard to have the same tools to meet all the projects - they were created for different goals, maintained by different people, having different code structure....

I'd suggest a loose mode - the maintainers are free to use the tools - based how it was working before.

Author: It shouldn't be obligated right away, but I think it should be the goal to get some consistency in all the packages.

Especially when talking about supported Node/ESLint versions, publish workflow, ... I think this would be a good idea to make it consistent.

Reviewer 7: If it’s not up to the maintainers, then they’ll be discouraged from contributing their project. There’s a reason that foundations like OpenJS mandate almost nothing for member projects.

Reviewer 2: yes, it's not a common org like standard; more like openJS - a collection of projects.

- How does this relate to stuff in eg. `@standard`?  
  Would there be an expectency from the wider community or the

>   `@eslint-community` org itself to transfer some stuff from these places?

Reviewer 2: 👎 to accept shared configs - they can be very opinionated, hard to say which is better. it 
should only accept eslint-related infrastructures: parsers, plugins, formatters..., so the shared configs like standard can also benifit from it.

Reviewer 3: Sometimes its not as easy to separate the two.

Standard eg. had a now deprecated [`eslint-plugin-standard`](https://github.com/standard/eslint-plugin-standard) (deprecated in favor of `eslint-plugin-node`: https://github.com/mysticatea/eslint-plugin-node/issues/178)

And it still has +1 million weekly downloads, still +1k dependents on npm and [676k repositories](https://github.com/standard/eslint-plugin-standard/network/dependents) depending on it on GitHub, so from metrics a package like that would actually qualify.

<img width="1197" alt="Skärmavbild 2022-06-02 kl  11 18 34" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/34457/171598559-2a58d220-9d5e-426f-8cef-a9162f6385d6.png">

Also:

Most plugins have a shared recommended config in them.

The difference between these are a bit blurry:

```json
"extends": ["plugin:node/recommended"]
```

```json
"extends": ["standard"]
```

Reviewer 8: I agree with not including shared configs. Anyone can create a duplicate shared config at any time via “extends”, so I don’t see a need to take over shareable configs.

Author: Extending them can still cause problems if these configs have (peer)dependencies that aren't compatible with the latest ESLint version or if they're referencing removed rules for instance.

Creating a fork on a personal account could solve this, but then we're again at the point that it's dependent on that one person again.

I agree that we should be more thought through when adding configs though.

  Some examples of already existing organizations like that are
  [@import-js](https://github.com/import-js) (which maintains
  [`eslint-plugin-import`](https://github.com/import-js/eslint-plugin-import)),
  [@jsx-eslint](https://github.com/jsx-eslint) (which maintains
  [`eslint-plugin-jsx-a11y`](https://github.com/jsx-eslint/eslint-plugin-jsx-a11y),
  [`eslint-plugin-react`](https://github.com/jsx-eslint/eslint-plugin-react) &
  [`jsx-ast-utils`](https://github.com/jsx-eslint/jsx-ast-utils)) &
  [@standard](https://github.com/standard) (which maintains a couple of
  [`standard`](https://github.com/standard/standard) related ESLint configs)

## Open Questions

<!--
    This section is optional, but is suggested for a first draft.

    What parts of this proposal are you unclear about? What do you
    need to know before you can finalize this RFC?

    List the questions that you'd like reviewers to focus on. When
    you've received the answers and updated the design to reflect them,
    you can remove this section.
-->

- What exact acceptance criteria do we want to use?
- What's the main place of communication for the community core team?

> - Would projects be allowed to accept sponsorships?

Author: @nzakas If ESLint TSC is comfortable with it, these community packages could be included in the contributor pool.
This however has the implication that ESLint TSC needs to stay in the loop.

If that's not desirable, we could maybe set up sponsorship for the org & let the community core team decide each month who's in the community contributor pool?

Reviewer 8: I’m not in favor of that. We need the organization to function on its own separate from the normal ESLint processes. We don’t have the bandwidth monitor an increasing number of packages every month, nor do we have the funding to support that.

I’d say that repos should be allowed to accept sponsorships. ESLint may choose to contribute as part of our ecosystem support efforts (like with typescript-eslint), but that wouldn’t be guaranteed.

Reviewer 2: I don't think it's not a right way to have a sponsorship for all the projects. I can imagine the org can be very large, every project/team is allowed to accept its own sponsorship. e.g. the ts-eslint team should have its own funding/contributor-pool.

Author: @aladdin-add The @typescript-eslint org will still exist next to this new org.

I don't have a problem with each repo being able to setup its own sponsorship though. 🤷‍♂️
Just wanted to suggest a way of doing things that's in line with the core ESLint org.

dependent on one person's GitHub/`npm` account.  
The added benefit is that the people maintaining the packages in the new org
_could_ create a structure to streamline the packages more. They _could_ for
instance decide things like using the same tools, supporting the same
Node/ESLint versions, if we want to release all "rescued" packages under the
`@eslint-community` `npm` scope or not, ...

As a reference, `@jest-community` has the following goal & intention:

> The goal of `@jest-community` is to have a loose but centralized home for
> stuff `jest` core thinks is neat and worth having but doesn't belong in the
> core itself. The org is a way to help ensure that these projects are not
> dependent on one person's GitHub account in case they move on.

The beauty of having a shared org is that the release process is centralised, so
no need to talk to `npm` about an ownership transfer and no need to fork and
republish under a new name. Just appoint new maintainers on GitHub and they can
work to restore continuity of service - a process which would be invisible to
users (i.e. users might see a pause in updates but not have to make changes -
the updates would just resume).

> ### Which projects should be involved?

Author: I think it's definitely something the ESLint TSC can discuss together with the community core team if they want to imo.

back.

## Detailed Design

<!--
   This is the bulk of the RFC.

   Explain the design with enough detail that someone familiar with ESLint
   can implement it by reading this document. Please get into specifics
   of your approach, corner cases, and examples of how the change will be
   used. Be sure to define any new terms in this section.
-->

### How do you envision `@eslint-community`?

Just like the [@jest-community](https://github.com/jest-community) org, the
`@eslint-community` org would be a centralized home for ESLint related packages
that don't belong in the main org or that are widely depended upon, aren't
maintained anymore and are given back to the community.

> Community repos for ESLint related projects

The benefit of having the org in place would be that the community isn't
dependent on one person's GitHub/`npm` account.  
The added benefit is that the people maintaining the packages in the new org
_could_ create a structure to streamline the packages more. They _could_ for
instance decide things like using the same tools, supporting the same
Node/ESLint versions, if we want to release all "rescued" packages under the

> `@eslint-community` `npm` scope or not, ...

Reviewer 10: It seems like there's ambiguity around when we should move an NPM package to the `@eslint-community` NPM scope.

On the one hand, it would be nice to keep the existing NPM package name whenever possible to avoid churn so the thousands or millions of users of the package don't have to manually switch from the old name to the new name (the majority of users might never even get around to doing this, resulting in substantial fragmentation). This is my preference.

On the other, there might be organizational benefits to moving packages to scopes?

Reviewer 7: I don't think there's much benefit to moving an npm package name. I agree whenever possible we'd want to avoid churn, so the only use case there would be when the original name was somehow unrecoverable.

Reviewer 3: Was about to write the same as @ljharb 👍 Only move when it needs to move

Author: We should aim to get the original repo/npm package, if that's not possible, we should go with a fork and/or publish it under the org namespace

> If a package is meeting these criteria, but we can't get into contact with the
> owner of the repo to transfer ownership over to the new org, we could
> temporarily fork the repo into the new org. However, the ultimate goal would
> always be to transfer the original repo to the new org.  
> If we had a temporary fork and are able to transfer the original repo to the new
> org, we should first create PRs to the original repo to bring it up to date with
> the fork before continuing with other tasks.

  to maintain a subset of ESLint related packages.  
  Some examples of already existing organizations like that are
  [@import-js](https://github.com/import-js) (which maintains
  [`eslint-plugin-import`](https://github.com/import-js/eslint-plugin-import)),
  [@jsx-eslint](https://github.com/jsx-eslint) (which maintains
  [`eslint-plugin-jsx-a11y`](https://github.com/jsx-eslint/eslint-plugin-jsx-a11y),
  [`eslint-plugin-react`](https://github.com/jsx-eslint/eslint-plugin-react) &
  [`jsx-ast-utils`](https://github.com/jsx-eslint/jsx-ast-utils)) & `@standard`
  (which maintains a couple of
  [`standard`](https://github.com/standard/standard) related ESLint configs)

## Open Questions

<!--
    This section is optional, but is suggested for a first draft.

    What parts of this proposal are you unclear about? What do you
    need to know before you can finalize this RFC?

    List the questions that you'd like reviewers to focus on. When
    you've received the answers and updated the design to reflect them,
    you can remove this section.
-->

- What exact acceptance criteria do we want to use?
- What's the main place of communication for the community core team?

> - Will the community core team be compensated out of the main ESLint budget?

Author: @nzakas I'm sure all of the above mentioned people who want to take the lead in this aren't doing it for the money.

I can only speak for myself (although I think most of us are thinking kind of the same way on this), so for me personally, I would do all the "work" regardless if I'm being paid or not.
Having some way of appreciation/compensation for spending time on this & running day to day activities would be a welcome extra, but it isn't my main motivator for doing this.

Reviewer 8: Well, let’s not fool ourselves, this wouldn’t be full-time money. :)

I was more thinking we could pay the same hourly rate we do for the team, not necessarily to motivate but rather to show appreciation for taking the time to do it. People’s time is worth something, and if folks are putting in a decent amount of work to benefit the ESLint project, then I think that deserves payment just like on other parts of the project.

Author: I've added a note about the ESLint TSC Meeting
Once the transcript is merged, the link will work.

Packages that are living under the new community org would be allowed to (keep)
accept(ing) sponsorship for the maintainers of that package.  

> The community core team will also setup its own sponsorship collective (like the

Reviewer 8: I feel like this would be confusing. If we are going to pay the org maintainers from the core fund, why would there be another collective too?

I feel like this would be confusing to everyone.

I have no objections to projects having their own collectives to donate to, it just seems like if eslint-community is part of the larger ESLint project, then the funding should all come from the core fund.

Reviewer 11: Yep, that's the same thing we do for [webpack](https://github.com/webpack/) and [webpack-contrib ](https://github.com/webpack-contrib)

Reviewer 8: @MichaelDeBoey I think this is the last part that needs resolution, what do you think?

Author: Oh then I think I misunderstood.

I though we would have the following flow

ESLint collective => ESLint community collective => community core team

But you're saying it would be

ESLint collective => community core team

Is that correct?

Reviewer 8: Yes, that’s correct.

  [@nodesecurity](https://github.com/nodesecurity) team.

- It should agree to the code of conduct of the org
- It should have an OSI-approved license
- `eslintbot` should be added as an owner to the original npm package

If a package is meeting these criteria, but we can't get into contact with the
owner of the repo to transfer ownership over to the new org, we could
temporarily fork the repo into the new org. However, the ultimate goal would
always be to transfer the original repo to the new org.  
If we had a temporary fork, we should create PRs to the original repo to bring
it up to date with the fork before continuing with other tasks.

### What permissions should maintainers have?

I think it would be best to have some sort of a community core team (of at least
3(?) people) that's making the decisions in terms of acceptance to the repo,
which would (in addition to ESLint TSC) all be admins of the org.

We can make a team (with sub-teams, if we want) for each package, where we give
maintainer rights on the repo for that specific package, but keep admin rights
to ESLint TSC & the community core team. This way we prevent that the repo would
be destroyed from the org.

> We'll create a setup where we publish new versions of the package with

Reviewer 8: If you really and to do this, then we need more details on how it would work.

Author: It would be nice if you could help me understand what @eslintbot is doing on the main repo & how it's set up there in order to write down how we could use it in the community org.

Reviewer 8: I don’t think we’d want the same setup. @eslintbot is a GitHub account, and this would only need npm. 

My suggestion: packages can tag and create GitHub releases, and that would trigger an action/workflow (unsure of specifics) that would use the npm eslintbot account to publish the release.

`eslintbot`. That way we can keep publishing new versions if someone would
dissapear.

> The community core team would help maintain all repos, whereas people in

Reviewer 8: Can you better define this separation? What tasks would the CCT handle? When would maintainers have to interact with the CCT?

Author: I think maintainers could work on their own without interference of the community core team if they don't want to.

The community core team could would in general not interfere with handing day to day business of a specific package if that package has dedicated maintainers.

The community core team would create PRs & a review from the dedicated maintainers would be necessary (just like with all PRs from external people).

Author: I've added a note about the ESLint TSC Meeting
Once the transcript is merged, the link will work.

specific teams would only help maintain these repositories.

The community core team would be responsible of administer the Code of Conduct
of the organization.

> The community core team would also be responsible to contact package maintainers

Reviewer 8: Let’s be very careful around this. I don’t think we want to be in the business of pulling packages from people. I’d like to see some more stringent criteria here, like maybe if a package hasn’t had a release in six months then we give the maintainers 30 days to respond to an email.

(outside of GitHub) if they appear inactive. If the package maintainers don't
respond in a reasonable time frame (npm gives you 14(?) days to respond to a
transfer request email), they could be considered non-responsive and the
community core team can step in to appoint a new maintainer for the repository.

**Bonus:** I think having our own place in the Discord server where we can
discuss some things would be a good idea as well.  

> This way the community core team has an open place to discuss some common things

Reviewer 8: Let’s be specific: is this a bonus or a must-have? Are we talking one channel? Is it private? What about a space for maintainers to collaborate? Does each package need a channel? Or can they request one?

Should this be a separate Discord server?

Author: For me personally, this is not a must-have, as we could operate the new org without it, but it's more like a "really nice to have".

I think it would be nice to keep this in the same Discord server, but under a separate group of channels, as that would keep all ESLint related discussions in 1 server and we can easily link people to the right channel that way.

Having the community core group responsible for creating these channels would be a good idea imo, as this way it won't create extra work for the ESLint TSC.

I think that having a separate channel for each package would be easiest for people to talk about things regarding that specific package. This also makes sure that these discussions don't pollute other packages' discussions.

Reviewer 8: Can you update the TFC with this?

I think we should probably just start with one channel for the community core team and worry about whether packages need their own channels later. I’m guessing most won’t have an active need for it.

> - What exact acceptance criteria do we want to use?

Reviewer 8: I think another question we should ask if the community core team is compensated out of the main ESLint budget? I can see arguments for both yes or no, and I’d. E interested in others thoughts.
